add IRSA for self-managed clusters proposal (#4164)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws: docs/proposal/20230317-irsa-support-for-awscluster.md

    - [Non-Goals/Future Work](#non-goalsfuture-work)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [User Stories](#user-stories)
      - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Requirements](#requirements)
      - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
      - [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

- [CAPA](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html#capa) - Cluster API Provider AWS. 
- [CAPI](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api) - Cluster API.
- [IRSA](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/iam-roles-for-service-accounts.html) - IAM Roles for Service Accounts
- [pod-identity-webhook](https://github.com/aws/amazon-eks-pod-identity-webhook) - Pod Identity Webhook Repo

## Summary

> The IAM Roles for Service Accounts takes the access control enabled by IAM and bridges the gap to kubernetes by adding roles based access to service accounts. CAPA users of self-managed clusters will now be able to give granular roles based access to the AWS API at a pod level.      

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IAM Roles for Service Accounts take the access control enabled by IAM and bridge the gap to Kubernetes by adding roles-based access to service accounts. CAPA users of self-managed clusters can now give granular roles-based access to the AWS API at a pod level.      
```

## Motivation

> This functionality is currently built into EKS, with a simple boolean in the AWSManagedCluster API called `AssociateOIDCProvider` CAPA will build a IAM OIDC provider for the cluster and create a trust policy template in a config map to be used for created IAM Roles. Self-managed clusters are able to use IRSA but require additional manual steps already done in Managed Clusters including patching kube-api-server, creating an OIDC provider and deploying the `pod-identity-webhook` which is documented in their [self hosted setup](https://github.com/aws/amazon-eks-pod-identity-webhook/blob/master/SELF_HOSTED_SETUP.md) walk through but with CAPA style ingredients like using the management cluster, kubeadm config modification and the built in serving certs' OpenID Configuration API endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This functionality is currently built into EKS, with a simple boolean in the AWSManagedCluster API called `AssociateOIDCProvider` CAPA will build an IAM OIDC provider for the cluster and create a trust policy template in a config map to be used for created IAM Roles. Self-managed clusters can use IRSA but require additional manual steps already done in Managed Clusters, including patching kube-api-server, creating an OIDC provider and deploying the `pod-identity-webhook`, which is documented in their [self-hosted setup](https://github.com/aws/amazon-eks-pod-identity-webhook/blob/master/SELF_HOSTED_SETUP.md) walkthrough but with CAPA style ingredients like using the management cluster, kubeadm config modification and the built-in serving certs' OpenID Configuration API endpoints.
```

The pieces to IRSA are easily created with the existing access for CAPA. By adding `AssociateOIDCProvider` to `AWSCluster` we can kick off a reconciliation process to generate all pieces necessary to utilize IRSA in your self-managed cluster. 

### Goals

> 1. On cluster create add all components to self-managed clusters to use IAM Roles for Service Accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On cluster creation, add all components to self-managed clusters to use IAM Roles for Service Accounts.
```

> 2. On cluster delete remove all external dependencies from the AWS account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Remove all external dependencies from the AWS account on cluster deletion.
```

### Non-Goals/Future Work
Migrate all IAM work for Managed cluster to the IAM service. 

## Proposal

> - Create a boolean on `AWSCluster` called `AssociateOIDCProvider` to match the `AWSManagedCluster` API and have a default value of false.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a boolean on `AWSCluster` called `AssociateOIDCProvider` to match the `AWSManagedCluster` API and have a default value of `false`.
```

- Migrate the status types for `OIDCProvider` out of the experimental EKS APIs and into the v1beta2 APIs. 

> - Build an IAM cloud service and add a reconciler to work to persist all components required for IRSA, the logic is as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Build an IAM cloud service and add a reconciler to work to persist all components required for IRSA; the logic is as follows.
```

  1. Create a self-signed issuer for the workload cluster namespace to be used to make the pod identity webhook serving cert.
  2. Generate the patch file and update kubeadm configs to write the patch to disk for the control plane nodes.
  3. Create the Identity Provider in IAM pointed to the S3 bucket.

>   4. Pause the reconciler until the workload cluster online as we have created all the pieces we can without a working kube api, the AWSMachine controller has additional code to annotate the `AWSCluster` if a control plane node is up and if the management cluster has a kubeconfig which will unpause our reconciler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  4. Pause the reconciler until the workload cluster is online, as we have created all the pieces we can without a working kube api, the `AWSMachine` controller has additional code to annotate the `AWSCluster` if a control plane node is up and if the management cluster has a kubeconfig which will unpause our reconciler.
```

This is quite a mouthful sentence. Consider breaking it down.

>   5. Copy the JWKS and OpenID Configuration from the kubeapi to the S3 bucket.

Reviewer: What's JWKS?

Author: https://auth0.com/docs/secure/tokens/json-web-tokens/json-web-key-sets

ill link it

  6. Create all kube components in the workload cluster to run the pod-identity-webhook
  7. Create the trust policy boilerplate configmap in the workload cluster 

> Identical to the EKS implementation, there will have a trust policy document boilerplate which references the ARN for the Identity Provider created in step 3. This can be used to generate IAM roles and the ARNs for those roles can be annotated on a service account. The pod-identity-webhook works watching by watching all service accounts and pods. When it finds a pod using a service account with the annotation it will inject AWS STS Tokens via environment variables generated from the role ARN. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identical to the EKS implementation, a trust policy document boilerplate will reference the ARN for the Identity Provider created in step 3. This can be used to generate IAM roles, and the ARNs for those roles can be annotated on a service account. The pod-identity-webhook works by watching all service accounts and pods. When it finds a pod using a service account with the annotation, it will inject AWS STS Tokens via environment variables generated from the role ARN. 
```

>it will inject AWS STS Tokens via environment variables generated from the role ARN. 

Inject it into the POD?

### User Stories

As an EKS cluster user who uses IRSA I want to...
- Migrate to self-managed clusters and maintain the same AWS API access

As a self-managed cluster user I want to...
- Give pods granular access to the AWS API based on IAM Roles

### Security Model

> There are no changes required to the security model as no new permissions or access is required to complete this feature. Access to the required CRDs are already declared for the controllers and as we are not adding any new kinds so there is no change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No changes to the security model are required as no new permissions or access is required to complete this feature. Access to the necessary CRDs is already declared for the controllers, and we are not adding any new kinds, so there is no change.
```

> No change is required to the AWS permissions the controller requires for reconciliation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No change is required to the AWS permissions used by the controller for reconciliation.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

## Alternatives

> The process to install everything to use IRSA is documented and could be done by hand if necessary but CAPA has complete control over the pieces needed and auto-mating this through a reconciler would make the feature on par with the existing functionality for Managed Clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process to install everything to use IRSA is documented and could be done by hand if necessary, but CAPA has complete control over the pieces needed and auto-mating this through a reconciler would make the feature on par with the existing functionality for Managed Clusters.
```

#### Benefits

> This approach makes IRSA in self-managed clusters quite trivial.The kube-api-server patch is actually quite tricky to manage by hand and CAPA already has access to all the AWS Infrastructure it needs to auto-manage this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach makes IRSA in self-managed clusters relatively trivial. The kube-api-server patch is tricky to manage by hand, and CAPA already has access to all the AWS Infrastructure it needs to auto-manage this problem.
```

The pieces to IRSA are easily created with the existing access for CAPA. By adding `AssociateOIDCProvider` to `AWSCluster` we can kick off a reconciliation process to generate all pieces necessary to utilize IRSA in your self-managed cluster. 

### Goals

1. On cluster creation, add all components to self-managed clusters to use IAM Roles for Service Accounts.
2. On cluster deletion, remove all external dependencies from the AWS account.

### Non-Goals/Future Work
Migrate all IAM work for Managed cluster to the IAM service. 

## Proposal
- Create a boolean on `AWSCluster` called `AssociateOIDCProvider` to match the `AWSManagedCluster` API and have a default value of `false`.
- Migrate the status types for `OIDCProvider` out of the experimental EKS APIs and into the v1beta2 APIs. 
- Build an IAM cloud service and add a reconciler to work to persist all components required for IRSA; the logic is as follows.
  1. Create a self-signed issuer for the workload cluster namespace to be used to make the pod identity webhook serving cert.
  2. Generate the patch file and update kubeadm configs to write the patch to disk for the control plane nodes.

>   3. Create the Identity Provider in IAM pointed to the S3 bucket.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of a bucket. What is in this bucket and why is it needed?

Author: There needs to be a public hosted jwks and open mid config for oidc to work. storing these in s3 is a simple way to have have two files public for sts token auth

Reviewer: That is fine, just mention that in the doc as well as a sidenote or a footnote :)

Reviewer: I still don't see any explanation what the S3 bucket will contain. Just write down something like, and S3 bucket exists that contains bla.

Reviewer: Hey @luthermonson. Can you add this note please before this part? I can approve it then. :)

Author: @Skarlso Added more details and sample s3 directory structure.

Reviewer: Excellent, thanks!

>   4. Pause the reconciler until the workload cluster is online, as we have created all the pieces we can without a working kube api, the `AWSMachine` controller has additional code to annotate the `AWSCluster` if a control plane node is up and if the management cluster has a kubeconfig which will unpause our reconciler.

Reviewer: >Pause the reconciler until the workload cluster is online

I assume you mean a busy wait, or a requeue with timeout or something like that?

Author: The code as written today let's the cluster controller return and assume it has nothing to do which is the "pause". Then the machine controller puts an annotation on the cluster when it has a control plane node ready and a kube config. The the cluster will reconcile again after being "paused" and start the final bits to connect to the cluster and finish the install
